docs: :memo: move expected input data from design repo (#993)
seedcase-project/seedcase-sprout: docs/design/architecture/input-data.qmd

---
title: "Input data"
---

The types of data we expect or anticipate to be input into Sprout are
described in this section. We design Sprout with these types of data and

> formats described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
formats in mind.
```
Because the previous sentence already says that they are described here

## Domain-specific types of data

Currently, we only have experience with health data, so we have a bias
towards that type of data.

### Health research

Health research data tends to consist of these types of data:

-   **Clinical**: This data is typically collected during patient visits
    to doctors. Depending on the country or administrative region, there
    will likely already be well-established data processing and storage
    pipelines in place.
-   **Register**: This type of data is highly dependent on the country
    or region. Generally, this data is collected for national or

>     regional administrative purposes, such as, recording employment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    regional administrative purposes, such as recording employment
```

    status, income, address, medication purchases, and diagnoses. Like

>     the routine clinical data, the pipelines in place for processing and
>     storage of this data are usually very extensive and well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    for routine clinical data, the pipelines in place for processing and
    storing this data are usually very extensive and well
```

    established.
-   **Biological sample data**: This type of data is generated from
    biological samples, like blood, saliva, semen, hair, or urine. Data
    generated from sample analytic techniques often produce large
    volumes of data per person. Samples may be generated in larger
    established laboratories or in smaller research groups, depending on
    what analytic technology is used and how new it is. The structure

>     and format of the generated data also tends to be highly variable
>     and depends heavily on the technology used, sometimes requiring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    and format of the generated data also tend to be highly variable
    and depend heavily on the technology used, sometimes requiring
```
(Unless "structure and format" are/is a unit)

    specialized software to process and output.

> -   **Survey or questionnaire**: This type of data is often done based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **Survey or questionnaire**: This type of data is often collected based
```
?

    on a given study's aims and research questions. There are hundreds
    of different questionnaires that can have highly specific purposes
    and uses for their data. They are also highly variable in the volume
    of data collected based on the survey, and on the format of the
    data.

## File and data formats

While we aim to handle a wide variety of data types, we will start with
the most common types of formats. We also have a limitation or
restriction that the data format needs to be open source and not

> proprietary, since we can process it if we don't have the software to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proprietary, since we cannot process it if we don't have the software to
```

read it.

The file formats we expect to work with are text (`.txt`) files, various
forms of comma-separated value (`.csv`) files, Excel (`.xls` or `.xlsx`)
files (technically closed source but practically easy to read), images,
audio, XML, JSON, and potentially some SQL databases.

## Flow or frequency of data collection

In research (and even in most industry settings), we rarely encounter
truly real-time data collection. Most data collection is done in
"batches", with data being collected at irregular and inconsistent

> intervals time and then stored to be processed later. This batch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intervals and then stored to be processed later. This batch
```

> collection can be breakdown into two categories based on their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collection can be broken down into two categories based on its
```

frequency:

-   *Routine or continuous collection*, where data is collected on a
    more regular interval and in smaller batches of "observational
    units"[^1]. Ingestion or processing of this type of data may happen
    on a more regular basis. Clinical data as well as survey or
    questionnaire data may likely fall under this category. For example,
    data collected on a few patients seen during the day at a clinic.
-   *Grouped collection*, where data is collected from many observational
    units during a short period of time at very irregular intervals or
    potentially only once. Data ingesting or processing occurs some time

>     after the all the data has been collected. Biological sample data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    after all the data has been collected. Biological sample data
```
